CAPP. 17-21] NOTES. 27

found together as in 1. 39 omnium mentes aniansque; vr. 5 totus et

mente et ammo in belluna Treverorum institi& cf. Catull. va. 4 nec
potis est dulcis Musarum exponere setus Ι mens animi. Cicero speaks of
mens as pars animi Rep. 11. 67, andin Tusc. 111. 11 he says that to it
regnum totius animi a natura moutam est. mens is strictly the
intellectual part of the animus or soul.

Cute. 20.

9 P. Crassus] he had been sent into Aquitania with ro cohorts and a
large cavalry force, as we learn from 11.

Aquitaniam] the boundaries of Aquitania were the Ocean‚ the upper l
course of the Garonne, M. Corbieres and the Pyrenees. Cf. 1. 1 note.

11 ex tertia] ‘is to be considered as forming a third part of Gaul’.
Such appears to be the general sense though the expression is a strange
one and possibly the text is at fault.

ro cum intellegeret] ‘understanding’t notice the slight carelessness in
the repetition of intellegebat after cum intellegeret; Caesar might well
have written perspicaelat or alebat.

13 L. 'Vol Praeconinus] nothing appears to be known of this person. ³

14 L. Mallo'aslthis is apparently L.¹ Manilius Nepos who was defeated
lttbltttttdttetusttl‘llthlltdtt.33.bttttttl
Sertorius η heis called L. Lollius. It will be noticed that Caesar
{ttttllutdttthhtz‘ttlttt.²¹¹M⁶htttlttltttsslilt{litt
hence he should strictly be called propraetor not proconsul.

18 Tolosa etNarbone] Tolosa (Toulouse) the chief town of the Volcae
Tectosages; Narbo Martius (Narbonne) founded by L. Licinius Crassus
118B.c. After Tolosa some inferior Mss insert Carcasone (Carcassone)
which is retained by Long.

19 civitates] ‘communities ot the province of Gaul bordering on these
districts'3 perhaps the word Galliae should be struck out3 it is quite
unnecessary.

oo Sentiatum] this tribe occupied the district of Sos, S.W. of Nerac, Ν.
of the Elusates whose name survives in Elusa (Eauze). They occupied
tlsse eglippi ἐξ the hills of Gascony and partly the valley of the Garonne

a 5 l convalle] Caesar only uses conualles here and in v. 3²·

curo. at.

30 adulescentulo] ‘stripling’. So Cicero writing in 55 nc. calls P.
Crassus adulescens. In Sal. Cat. 49 1. Caesar is called adulescentulus at
the age of 39 in contradistinction to his op nent Catulus who was then
extrema aetate about 59. Ρ. Crassus was illed in the Parthian was ’ux
53 ac. ς in the subsequent negotiations his fatuos hh. Quassussuexx'sss&

 

